In this section, we're going to provideyou with an overview

of what CLASlite is, why it matters andhow it emerged.

CLASlite is a software package created bymy team at

the Department of Global Ecology of theCarnegie Institution for Science.

It is designed for highly automatedidentification of

deforestation and forest degradation,using remotely sensed satellite imagery.

Our mission is to provide governments,

non-government organizations, and academicinstitutions with

advanced and scientifically soundforest-monitoring technology.

We are working toward the goal that, oneday, forest-monitoring

with satellites will be an every dayactivity for non-experts.

We hope to make CLASlite a common tool

for improving conservation, forest

management and resource policydevelopment.

Tropical forests cover less than 5% of allland but harbor about

half of all species on earth.

Aside from being home to the richestbiodiversity on

the planet, forests provide fuel andsustenance to human inhabitants.

They also store massive amounts of

carbon that would otherwise accelerateglobal warming.

These are just a few examples of theimmense

role forests play in regulating thenatural and built environments.

Yet forests are under threat.

Several million hectares a year aredestroyed,

as forests compete with agriculturalexpansion, logging,

mining, road building, and other landuses.

We'll get into our technical definition offorest cover later in this course.

For now, just know that, when we refer toforest

cover, we are talking about land dominatedby tree canopy.

We define deforestation as the conversionof deforested

land to non-forested land and we definedisturbance

as diffuse thinning of the forest cover.

This could occur if a handful of old treesin a patch of forest die,

or if they're cut down for timber.

We define forest degradation as the

temporal or spatial persistence ofdisturbance.

Examples of degradation are repeated firesand selective logging.

Note that none of these forest change

definitions specify the cause of thechange.

CLASlite detects natural, as well asanthropogenic

(in other words, human caused) changes.

In the face of such daunting global forestloss, we at

the Carnegie Institution developed theCarnegie Landsat Analysis System, or CLAS.

CLAS was our original program formonitoring

the state of forests using satelliteimagery.

It could be run on super computers overthe course of several days.

Out of this technology we developedCLASlite, a

faster, more accurate, versatile and userfriendly software.

CLASlite is now in its third version and has

undergone great improvements in processingtime and functionality.

This table illustrates these developments.

Basically, we can see that the currentversion of CLASlite

is much more accessible to non-expertusers for routine use

using a variety of satellites.Now, let's provide a high-level overview

of CLASlite's processes and outputs.CLASlite performs four basic functions,

each one building on those that camebefore it.

They are the following,

each of which we'll explain in its ownsection of this course.

Number one: Calibration.Number two: Spectral analysis.

Three: Classification of forest cover.And finally, four: Change detection.

Here's an illustration of CLASlite'sprocessing stream and

its output for each of the four steps.

Note that,

for the purposes of this course, theexample imagery

that we provide will be from from theLandsat

series of satellites, but the principlesthat we discuss

are general and should apply to allcompatible satellite sensors.

In rare cases where we are talking about aCLASlite process

that is unique to Landsat data, we willlet you know.

Now let's clarify some of the confusingpoints about what CLASlite is, and is not.

CLASlite is highly automated in the sensethat it runs

each step by itself, you only have toenter input files and metadata.

That said, it doesn't just give you all theanswers you're looking for.

You need to know how to interpretCLASlite's outputs

in order for them to be useful to you,

and in order to tweak any of CLASlite'ssettings that are customizable.

CLASlite does its mapping based onalgorithms

that are designed to work throughout theworld.

Because of this, it may not capture

the intricate forest dynamics of aparticular location.

Yet, although CLASlite's algorithms aretuned to tropical forest characteristics,

several of the steps will work for anylocation on Earth.

The third point is that CLASlite's outputs

are a set of ecologically meaningfulimages.

You can use these results to inferimportant landscape properties, such as

biodiversity or carbon stocks, butCLASlite will not do this for you.

CLASlite is constantly evolving. This isbecause we continue to work on technical

development of the software as we build

capacity to make it more broadlyaccessible.

As we release new and enhanced versions ofthe software to the community,

we gain feedback from users running

CLASlite from various geographies and forvarious applications.

This feedback guides further research intechnical development.

As such, we are continually advancing

our technology to support forestmonitoring globally.